ECET 27000 Lab #2 & 3 ÔÇô ATmega328 Project

Objectives:
´éĚ
´éĚ
´éĚ
´éĚ
´éĚ
´éĚ
´éĚ
´éĚ
´éĚ

Be able to implement a microcontroller without a development board
Build a microcontroller circuit on a soldered protoboard
Learn to program a microcontroller without a BootLoader
Learn how to utilize the Arduino IDE examples to create an ISP
Learn to program a microcontroller with AVRDUDE
Learn to integrate an ISP into AVR Studio
Learn to integrate an ISP into the Arduino IDE
Test a microcontroller system for proper operation
Document the test results of a microcontroller system

PRELAB
´üÂ Read the first 4 pages of this document before coming to lab!
´üÂ In addition to your ECET 27000 parts kit, you need to bring your
ATmega2560 microcontroller, some male to female cables, a USB
cable, and a solderless protoboard with you to lab

In order to receive credit for this laboratory activity, you must
properly document your efforts in your logbook.

1

Assignment Overview:
The goal of this assignment is to design, build, and test a small microcontroller
development board using a point-to-point protoboard. To this end, you will be creating a
simple ATmega328 microcontroller development board similar to the one shown below.
Your board will be like an Arduino Uno but will not include a USB connection or a crystal
oscillator.
For this simplified design, you will need the microcontroller (28 PDIP), two 6-pin
headers for Port B and C respectfully, an 8-pin header for Port D, a 2-pin header for
+5V and ground, an appropriate header for AVCC power, the class standard 6-pin AVR
ISP header, and an appropriate reset button.
The design should include two bypass capacitors across the power pins (VCC and
AVCC) and a pull-up resistor on the reset line of the microcontroller. The simplified
version will operate using the internal RC oscillator. You may want to consult the Atmel
application note AVR042: AVR Hardware Design Considerations in addition to your
class notes to help you design the circuit.

Building the actual board:
The simplified Arduino UNO board will ultimately be constructed using the small halfsized solder board located in your parts kit. You will absolutely want to use a DIP
socket for your project (you solder the socket to your board and then you will put the
microcontroller in the socket). The socket and ATmega328 should be in your parts kit.
You should have the headers required to complete this assignment in your current and
previous parts kits. You should also have a reset button and the required capacitors to
complete the circuit as well, but if not, you should be able to obtain them from the EE
parts store.
2

Planning the board:
One of the first things you need to do is to plan out the board before you start to
construct it. You should be able to place some of the headers into the protoboard so
that you donÔÇÖt need jumper wires, but this will not work for all of them. Do your best to
minimize the number of jumpers as it will help to simplify the process of building the
board and make a much cleaner design, not mention it is faster to build.
Use this image of the protoboard, or another image if preferred, to plan your layout.
Make sure you DOCUMENT THIS IN YOUR LOGBOOK!!

Testing:
You will need to execute a testing strategy to prove that your board is operational once
built. This will ensure that the IO ports are operational ÔÇô both input and output, that you
can send and receive serial data through the UART, that you can perform ADC
operations with the board through multiple channels, and that the PWM outputs work
properly.
The testing will be accomplished using very small, dedicated test programs. You should
NOT attempt to do all of this testing with one program. Acceptable test programs for all
of these functions were developed during ECET 17900 and can be reused here so you
should not have to create these test programs from scratch. You will need to identify
the appropriate programs and how to use them. If you cannot find these programs, they
can be reproduced fairly easily. They will also need to be re-compiled for the 328 as
well.
Very specific details with respect to testing this project will be presented during lecture
and are included at the end of this document!
3

Placing Code into the Microcontroller/Downloading Code:
Transferring your code into the microcontroller is going to be one of the biggest
challenges with this project. This is also one of the biggest learning objectives for this
activity as well.
When you start with a new microcontroller, there is no bootloader for you to utilize, not
to mention the fact that we wonÔÇÖt have a USB connection. You will not be able to simply
plug in a cable and download your code. You will need to go through a few additional
steps.
In order to place programs into a new microcontroller, you will need this thing called an
In-System Programmer, or ISP for short. An ISP is actually just a microcontroller that
has been programmed to transfer code into another microcontroller. The preferred
option for obtaining an ISP in this course is to simply turn an existing Arduino board like
your ATmega2560 into the required ISP. An Arduino Uno board would also work.
The Arduino IDE has an ISP Example included with it. This example will be utilized to
transfer code into the ATmega328 that you build for this project. Once ready, you will
open the example in the Arduino IDE, make a few minor changes to the example code,
compile the code and download it into your ATmega2560. Then, you will connect the
ATmega328 microcontroller that you build to the output pins of the ATmega2560 and
initiate the programming sequence on your computer. The specific details of how to
accomplish this are presented in this document.
The first step:
The first thing we need to do is to verify that your ATmega328 microcontroller is ÔÇťgoodÔÇŁ
and that you can communicate with it through an ISP. To accomplish this goal, we are
going to place the ATmega328 into a ÔÇťregularÔÇŁ solderless protoboard. Then, we are
going to ÔÇťcreateÔÇŁ the ISP that we need and then utilize the ISP to read what is known as
the device ID of the target ATmega328.
To get started, you will want to ÔÇťrollÔÇŁ the legs of the ATmega328 so that they are
perpendicular to the body of the microcontroller so that they will actually plug into the
breadboard. You can do this by hand or with a pair of pliers as shown below.

4

Once the legs have been adjusted, simply place the ATmega328 into the breadboard.
MAKE CERTAIN that you do NOT bend any of the legs under the IC as you do this!
Creating the ISP
To create the required ISP, you need to plug your ATmega2560 microcontroller into an
open USB port on a computer and then open the Arduino IDE. Once you have the
Arduino IDE running, open the ArduinoISP example, and select the appropriate
processor, com port, etc. from the pulldown menus.

Once you have the ISP example open, you will need to scroll down and find the settings
shown in the image on the next page. These are the default pins on the ATmega2560
that would be utilized to communicate with the target ATmega328. While perfectly
acceptable, it might be better to move these connections to an alternate location.

5

Make the following changes to the code shown above:
´éĚ

First, change ÔÇť#define RESET

´éĚ

Then, uncomment the line that says ÔÇť// #define USE_OLD_STYLE_WIRINGÔÇŁ
by deleting the ÔÇť//ÔÇŁ at the beginning of the line

´éĚ

Then, change ÔÇť#define PIN_MOSI

11ÔÇŁ to ÔÇť#define PIN_MOSI

51ÔÇŁ

´éĚ

Next, change ÔÇť#define PIN_MISO

12ÔÇŁ to ÔÇť#define PIN_MISO

50ÔÇŁ

´éĚ

And last, change ÔÇť#define PIN_SCK 13ÔÇŁ to ÔÇť#define PIN_SCK

52ÔÇŁ

10ÔÇŁ to ÔÇť#define RESET

53ÔÇŁ

With those changes made, compile and download the code into your ATmega2560 like
you would any other Arduino Sketch.

6

Now, connect your ATmega2560 to your target ATmega328 by following the
connections in the table below:
ISP ATmega2560

Target ATmega328

Pin 53
Pin 51
Pin 50
Pin 52

to
to
to
to

The Reset Line (Pin 1)
The MOSI Line (Pin 17)
The MISO Line (Pin 18)
The SCK Line (Pin 19)

+5V
GND

to
to

VCC (Pin 7)
GND (Pin 8)

When finished, you should have something that looks like this:

At this point, you are now ready to attempt to communicate with your target
ATmega328.

7

There are multiple ways to utilize the ISP to communicate with and to program a target
microcontroller like your ATmega328. The first one we are going to utilize is a
ÔÇťcommand line promptÔÇŁ interface to control the AVRDude application.
Using AVRDude
AVRDude is the application that runs on your computer and interfaces with the ISP
programmer. You have probably used ARVDude a number or times without every
knowing it. ARVDude is the application that runs on your computer and is responsible to
downloading your code from the Arduino IDE into your microcontroller when you select
the ÔÇťDownloadÔÇŁ command. AVRDude is also the program that runs behind the scenes
when you utilized the downloading GUI in ECET 17900. In both cases, the details of
invoking the downloading process were hidden from you. Now we are going to expose
the process, and look at the details.
One of the biggest challenges with using AVRDude is that it is a command line prompt
driven application. The Arduino IDE and the ECET 17900 GUI both automatically create
the command line prompt instructions for you, so you didnÔÇÖt have to do it yourself.
However, for this activity, you will have to do it yourself, but donÔÇÖt worry, I will walk you
through the entire process.
Using a command line prompt may be new to a lot of you. The following is meant to
help guide you through the process, but it is not designed to be a complete guide to
everything there is to know about command line prompts and the AVRDude application.
If you want to learn more and explore more, feel free to search the Internet for additional
information.
You can enter a command prompt in several different ways, and depending on the
operating system (Windows 10 vs Windows 11), you have to do things slightly different.
Before we launch the command line interface, we should do some setup first. The first
thing you need is the AVRDude application on your computer and in a known location.
You should already have this from ECET 17900 (this is included in the MEGA
Downloader ZIP file that we used in 17900 to download programs). I think it is better to
make a copy of the AVRDude program into an ECET 27000 folder, but that is ultimately
up to you.
In my case, I have a directory called ÔÇťTestingÔÇŁ in My Documents, under an ECET 27000
folder as shown in the next image. I took the Uploader/Downloader folder from ECET
17900 and just copied the entire contents into an ÔÇťAVRDudeÔÇŁ subfolder. Now, if you look
closely, you will see some extra Hex files in this directory that wonÔÇÖt be in yours. IÔÇÖll
discuss what these are and where they came from later in this document.

8

To enter into the command window when using Windows 10, select the entire path at
the top of the window and type ÔÇťcmdÔÇŁ as shown in the images on the next page. This
should launch a command line prompt window in this specific location on the computer.
If you are using Windows 11, the process is slightly different. With Windows 11, you
need to right-click in the window and select ÔÇťOpen in Windows TerminalÔÇŁ.
Doing either of these should open a command prompt that is already located in that
exact folder. Your folder structure will determine the exact path that shows up, but it
should look something like the image shown below:

9

My test
files

To enter the command prompt when using Windows 10, select this entire path and
then replace it with ÔÇťcmdÔÇŁ and press enter.

The benefit to opening the command prompt in this folder is that you can type AVRDude
commands and download the hex files that have been placed in this folder without the
need to change directories or do any other DOS directory commands.
Establishing Communication with the Target
The very first ÔÇťthingÔÇŁ that you need to do is to verify that you can communicate with your
target ATmega328 and that your target ATmega328 is responding appropriately.
Establishing communication is critical as nothing else can happen if you canÔÇÖt
communicate with the target. This will also verify that your programmer is working and
10

that you have the connections between the programmer and the target correct. You
could do this step every time you connect your ISP programmer to your target, but you
probably donÔÇÖt need to. However, if for some reason youÔÇÖre having problems
programming your target, then running these commands may help you troubleshoot.
To establish communication with the target, you will need to type a command similar to
this one:

c:\>avrdude -P COM12 -b 19200 -c avrisp -p m328p ÔÇôn
In this example, the ISP programmer (Arduino 2560) is COM 12, thus ÔÇť-P COM12ÔÇŁ. You
will need to use the comm port of your Arduino ISP board (this is your ATmega2560).
The ÔÇťm328pÔÇŁ is the designation for the target ATmega328p microcontroller.
Typing the command from above directly into the terminal window should produce
similar results to those shown below.

The key result is that the Device signature is a value similar to that shown above.
Two important notes: 1 ÔÇô the Arduino IÔÇÖm using as my ISP Programmer is COM 22 and
IÔÇÖm actually using an ATmega8 in this example instead of an ATmega328. You will see
those reflected in the actual command string that I used (ÔÇťCOM22ÔÇŁ and ÔÇťm8ÔÇŁ instead of
ÔÇťm328pÔÇŁ). Be certain to utilize the COM port for your board and ÔÇťm328pÔÇŁ.
There are typically three responses that one gets from the previous command. You will
either get a ÔÇťtrueÔÇŁ device signature (something like 0x1e9307 as shown), or you will get
0x000000 or 0xffffff. If you get 0x000000 or 0xffffff then there is more than likely a
problem with your hardware ÔÇô the connections between programmer and target are not
correct. Or, in rare cases, there is a problem with your actual ATmega328.
If you do not get a valid device ID response, you need to try a couple of different things
to see if the problem is with your target ATmega328 or your ISP Programmer. The first
step is to examine the connections between the ISP and the target microcontroller very
closely and ensure they are wired properly. If you find an issue, correct it, and try again.
11

If that doesnÔÇÖt solve your issue, see if you have a classmate that was successful, and
then attempt to utilize their ISP 2560 to communicate with your target 328 to see if there
is something wrong with your ISP. If you can read the device ID with their ISP, then
there is something wrong with your ISP and you need to fix it. If a previously working
ISP wonÔÇÖt read the target device ID, then the last option is to use your ISP to attempt to
read the device ID of another studentÔÇÖs target ATmega328. If you can read a different
deviceÔÇÖs signature, but not your own, then there is more than likely something wrong
with your target 328 and it will need to be replaced. This process should tell you where
the problem lies.
Once you have successfully established communication with your target microcontroller,
you are now ready to proceed with the building on your permanent project. But firstÔÇŽ
At this point, you need to stop and document everything you have done up to this
point in your logbook! You need to take pictures of how things are connected,
and screen shots of what you have typed and what responses you received.
Document all of this in your logbooks!!
Once you have everything up to this point documented in your logbook, solder the
required components onto the half-sized protoboard. Be certain to utilize the 28-pin DIP
socket that came in your parts kit.
Do NOT solder your microcontroller directly to the protoboard.
Once you have your board built, install your microcontroller into the socket and repeat
the same process from above to verify that your microcontroller is still communicating.
If your microcontroller is no longer communicating or providing a valid device ID, then
more than likely there is a problem with the board you built. It is also possible that you
damaged your target 328 somehow. The easiest way to find out is to place the target
microcontroller back into the solderless breadboard and repeat the steps from above. If
you can communicate with the target 328 while it is in your breadboard, but not in the
circuit you built, then you know the problem is with the circuit you built. If you canÔÇÖt
communicate with the target in either the solderless protoboard or the circuit you built,
the problem could either be with the ISP or with the target 328. Follow the steps above
to figure out which one is the problem.
Once you have your board built and working, you need to make updated entries
and document everything in your logbook!
Once your finished board is communicating, you are now ready to start downloading
programs into your target microcontroller to prove that it is fully operational.
12

Preparing to Transfer Programs into your Target ATmega328
Now it is time to download your code into the target. There are at least three different
ways to transfer your program into the target microcontroller. Regardless of which
approach you utilize, you have to have the ISP program running in your ATmega2560.
You can open the Arduino IDE each time you need to do this, or you can take
advantage of the following process.
One of the hidden details associated with the Arduino IDE is that the Arduino IDE does
in fact create a Hex file. Most people donÔÇÖt realize this because it is automatically
downloaded into the target microcontroller. By default, the Arduino IDE does not tell
you what the file name is, or where that file is located on your computer. Moreover, the
file is usually placed in a hidden file folder that is very difficult to find on your own.
However, you can go into the settings of the Arduino IDE and tell the IDE to show you
where the file is located. To do this, select the ÔÇťPreferencesÔÇŁ option under ÔÇťFileÔÇŁ, and
then check on the ÔÇťshow verboseÔÇŁ option for compilation. Now, when you compile your
code, you will see a long list of messages in the output window. If you scroll up through
those messages, you should be able to not only find the name of the hex file that was
created, but youÔÇÖll also find the directory/folder structure for where that file is located.
This should be in a hidden folder, but you can change the options in Explorer to show
hidden folders and then you can actually go straight to that file and access the hex file.
This brings up a question: Why would you want to access the hex file created by the
ISP Example program? Well, for one, if you know where this hex file is located, you can
actually use the same Uploader GUI from ECET 17900 to simply upload the hex file into
your Arduino anytime you want to turn the Arduino into an ISP Programmer without
having to go back through the Arduino IDE to do it! This could be very handy.
If you want to possibly do this, you would be wise to create a new folder in your 27000
folder or somewhere similar, and not only copy the hex file into this new location, but
you should also create a document that outlines all the procedures to actually use the
ISP Programmer like what pins are used for the SPI connections, and the like. Putting
all of that in one place makes it much easier to utilize the ISP in the future!
Note: This same process will actually work for any project created in the Arduino IDE.
They all create Hex files and you can use this approach to copy those Hex files into a
better folder location so you can access them later if you so desire, without having to go
through the Arduino IDE.
Back to the task at hand: Regardless of the approach, you must make certain that the
ISP program is downloaded into your ATmega2560 to turn it (back) into an ISP so we
can move forward.
13

Using AVRDude to Program your Target
The first approach weÔÇÖre going to cover is the same one that you utilized to verify that
your target microcontroller was ÔÇťaliveÔÇŁ.
LetÔÇÖs assume that you have created a program called Output_0x32 that simply writes
the hexadecimal value 32 to Port D on the target ATmega328 microcontroller and you
want to transfer this program into your target microcontroller. Once you have this
program written, you need to copy the Output_0x32.hex file to same folder as the
AVRDude application so that you donÔÇÖt have to deal with the file path (this is why there
were hex files in the folder with the ARVDude application from earlier).
In order to actually transfer the code, you need to execute a command like the one
shown below. Here, the first part of the command is the same as that used to establish
communication with the target. The difference between the original command and this
one is that this command sequence includes the keyword ÔÇť-U flash:w:ÔÇŁ which tells the
programmer to write the specified hex file into the target microcontrollerÔÇÖs flash memory.
c:\>avrdude -P COM12 -b 19200 -c avrisp -p m328p -u -U flash:w:ÔÇŁTest_program.hexÔÇŁ:i

Below is what the process would look like to execute the command to transfer the file
called ÔÇťOutput_0x32.hexÔÇŁ into the target microcontroller.

Once the command is executed, the programmer will establish communication with the
target, and then the HEX file will be downloaded into the target microcontroller. Once
the file is written to the target, the programmer will verify that the program was
successfully placed in the target. Upon verification of the programming process, the
sequence ends and the target microcontroller will now be running the program! This
process can be used to transfer any existing hex file into the target.
14

Programming Straight from AVR Studio
While highly effective, the process of using a command window is not the most userfriendly method. However, there are at least two other methods that are much, much
easier to do. The first one will take advantage of the External Tools feature built into
AVR Studio, and is almost identical to the process utilized in ECET 27900!
Once you have downloaded the Arduino ISP example code into your ATmega2560, you
can tell AVR Studio to utilize this programmer to load programs directly from AVRStudio
into your target board, through the programmer.
To start, select the Tools option in AVRStudio, and then select External Tools. (Note:
you have to specify that you want to be an Advanced User to do this).

Once selected, a window will appear where you configure the external tool (shown on
the next page). Start by selecting the Add button and then specify the title of the tool. In
this case, I called mine ÔÇťProgram 27000 BoardÔÇŁ. Next, click on the button next to the
Command textbox and navigate to your folder where the AVRDude program is located,
and then click on the AVRDude.exe file. Once that is selected, the next step is to type
the string below into the Arguments textbox as a single line while replacing the ## next
to COM with the com port of your ISP:
-P\\.\COM## -b 19200 -c avrisp -p m328p -u
-U flash:w:"$(ProjectDir)Debug\$(TargetName).hex":i
15

Once you have the AVRDude exe file linked and the arguments entered, select the ÔÇťUse
Output WindowÔÇŁ checkbox and then Apply, followed by OK.

If things are configured properly, now you can create a program for your target
ATmega328 board inside AVRStudio, and then click on the Tools tab and the ÔÇťProgram
270 BoardÔÇŁ option, and the process should automatically happen! The really nice thing
about this approach is that the ÔÇť(ProjectDir)ÔÇŁ and ÔÇť(TargetName)ÔÇŁ options are
automatically filled in by AVRStudio. Also, since we checked the ÔÇťUse Output WindowÔÇŁ
option, the progress and results will be displayed in the window at the bottom of the IDE
so you can see if the file was uploaded successfully or if something went wrong.

16

Programming Through the Arduino IDE
The same type of process can also be done with the Arduino IDE. To setup the process
in the Arduino IDE, simply go to the Tools pulldown menu, then select the ÔÇťArduino as
ISPÔÇŁ option from the list of available Programmers (see the image on the next page),
and be certain to specify the port that goes with your ISP microcontroller. There is one
big ÔÇťcatchÔÇŁ to this approach. The Arduino IDE assumes that your ISP will be
communicating at 115200, not the default 19200. To overcome this issue, you need to
specify in your ISP code that you are using a different baud rate. To do this, simply
comment out the line of code that defines the baud rate to be 19200 and uncomment
the line of code that will then specify the baud rate to be 115200.
// Configure the baud rate:
//#define BAUDRATE

19200

#define BAUDRATE

115200

Once you have made this change, you will need to re-compile the ISP code and
download it into your ATmega2560. Actually, you could specify 115200 as the baud rate
for any of the approaches, not just this one. If you do this, you would need to specify the
correct baud rate when you type the commands or in the AVR Studio arguments.
17

With those change made, you can create sketches inside the Arduino IDE for the target
ATmega328 and then download them through the ISP into the target board simply by
clicking on the Download button. The Arduino IDE should automatically download the
code through the ISP for you. One note here: When I do this, there is a very noticeable
pause or delay before the program is actually downloaded. I donÔÇÖt know if this is normal,
or just my computer.

Extra Stuff
You can use the steps outlined in this document to program a multitude of Atmel
microcontrollers. A complete list can be found in the AVRDude programmer
documentation. For this project, you will always use ÔÇť-p m328pÔÇŁ, but again, thatÔÇÖs not
the only one we can program.
It should also be noted here that you can use these processes to place the Arduino
BootLoader into a new chip if you would ever need to do so.

18

Need a Permanent Programmer?
Depending on the level of microcontroller programming you do, or the types of projects
that you do, you might find yourself in need of or wanting a ÔÇťpermanentÔÇŁ programmer.
You can buy a commercially available programmer from multiple sources. Some
popular choices are the Atmel AVRISP mkII, the Sparkfun Pocket AVR Programmer, or
the Sparkfun Tiny AVR programmer. The prices of these can range from over $125
down to $15 or so. However, you can also make your own for around $5 with very little
effort.
A very inexpensive option is to buy an Arduino Nano type board from Amazon like the
one shown below for around $5, and then download the ISP Example code into it! Once
you do that, then you have a $5 programmer that you can just leave programmed all the
time. One big advantage of the Nano board is that it comes with a USB connection, so
you can plug it into your computer for power and communication.

There are a few details that you have to get right, but they are minimal. For starters, I
would set the baud rate to 115200 as previously discussed in this document. Next, you
need to specify where you want your interface pins to be located. We originally used
pins 50 through 53. The Nano does not have that many pins. When I did this, I put SCK,
MISO, and MOSI pins on 2, 3, 4, and reset on pin 5 and it worked just fine for me.
If you read through all of the comments at the top of the ISP Example code, you will see
references to some status LEDs for things like ÔÇťHeartbeatÔÇŁ, ÔÇťProgrammingÔÇŁ, and ÔÇťErrorÔÇŁ.
You donÔÇÖt have to have these LEDs, but they can be nice to have especially if youÔÇÖre
going to make a permanent programmer. If can be helpful to have these indicators in
certain situations.

19

20

Testing of the Simplified ATmega328 Project:
A major goal of the simplified ATmega328 project is testing the board. More
specifically, it is the development and then execution of test plans.
One of the biggest mistakes people make when trying to test a project is that they only
test one or two things and they donÔÇÖt thoroughly test all of the functionality of the project.
Another common mistake is that people donÔÇÖt focus on one small piece of the project at
a time and tend to combine the testing of features together which leads to confusion in
the results and increases the likelihood that some features arenÔÇÖt tested thoroughly, or
tested at all.
The goal of this document is to lead you through the development of a series of simple
test plans to thoroughly test your ATmega328 project. For this project, we will need to
develop at least five different test plans: 1 ÔÇô establishing communication with the target
and verifying the device signature, 2 ÔÇô basic input and output operation, 3 ÔÇô verifying
UART communications, 4 ÔÇô verification of the Analog-to-digital converter, and 5 ÔÇô the
ability to create pulse-width modulated outputs.

Getting Started:
LetÔÇÖs start at the beginning. You will need to be able to communicate with your
ATmega328 through the ISP in order to do anything with your ATmega328. Since you
have to be able to communicate in order to do anything else, this is logically the first
thing to test.
This document will walk you through the process of creating a detailed test plan for this
section.
The first step is to write out the goals for the test. Then we need to document any setup
stuff that needs to happen. Next, weÔÇÖll need to create a detailed list of steps that need to
be followed, along with the results that we expect after each step. Once we have all of
the required information, the last step is to actually enter this information into an Excel
Spreadsheet to create the actual formal test plan and procedures. As you actually test
the project, you record the results either in Excel or you print out the Excel Spreadsheet
and record the results on the paper by hand. For this course, printing the test plans is
the preferred method since they can then be placed into your logbook!

21

Test #1 ÔÇô Establishing Communication and Reading the Device Signature
The Goal:
The goal of this test is to determine if the target microcontroller is ÔÇťaliveÔÇŁ by
establishing communication with the ATmega328 microcontroller (the
ATmega328 is known as the Target since it is the device that we will be
programming). We will know that the target is operational and responding
properly if we are able to successfully read the device signature.
Setup:
In order to establish communication with the target, an ISP is needed. For this
project, an ATmega2560 will be programmed as an ISP through the ARDUINO
IDE. If not previously done, the ISP program must be downloaded into the
ATmega2560.
Once the ISP is ready, the next step is to power the simplified ATmega328
board. The easiest way to supply power to the simplified ATmega328 board is to
power it from the ISP since the ISP will be connected to a PC through a USB
cable. Start by connecting a common ground wire between the simplified
ATmega328 and the ISP board. Then, connect a wire between the VCC pin on
the simplified ATmega328 and the ISP board.
Once the boards are powered, the next step is to establish the connections
required to program the target through the ISP. These include the Reset line, the
serial clock, and the data in and data out lines. Historically, the data in and data
out lines were known as MISO and MOSI. Depending on the resources you are
using, these lines may have different names, but they still function the same.
Regardless of the names, make these four connections between the target and
the ISP.
Detailed Steps:
Connect an ISP to the target ATmega328 microcontroller.
Ensure that the ISP and the target are both powered. Use a voltmeter to
measure the voltage on the VCC and GND pins on the target 328
microcontroller.
Launch a Command Prompt window
Execute the AVR Dude command to read the targetÔÇÖs device ID.
Verify that the reported targetÔÇÖs device ID matches the manufacturerÔÇÖs device ID.
22

Once we have the above information, the next step is to take this information and create
formal test plan using the Excel template provided. The formal test plan for establishing
communication is shown at the end of this document as an example to follow for
creating test plans.
Now that we have a formal test plan, the next step is to follow the test plan and record
the results! For this course, the best option is to print out the test plan and record the
results on the paper version so you can place it into your logbook.
In the event that there is a ÔÇťfailureÔÇŁ along the way, then troubleshooting and repair, or
other work must be done to fix the issues that caused the failure. Once the failure has
been addressed, the test must be started over while again recording the results.
Hopefully whatever issue was causing the failure can be found and fixed.
It is important to document the process of testing your projects. From an educational
perspective, instructors want to see that you tested the project, that you performed any
troubleshooting necessary, and that you fixed any issues. Therefore, if you have a test
that encounters a failure, you should document this failed test in your logbook (tape the
formal test plan with the failed results in your logbook). Once youÔÇÖve documented the
failed test, the next step is to hypothesize as to what may have caused the failure and to
create a ÔÇťplan of actionÔÇŁ to troubleshoot and fix the issues. This plan of action should
also be documented in your logbook and with any ÔÇťrepairsÔÇŁ that you made. Then, you
need to rerun the test and include those results in your logbook as well.
Now that we have a formal test plan for establishing communications and reading the
device signature, the next step is to create the other test plans following the same
steps.
The following sections provide significant guidance for how to test each piece of the
project, but you will notice that the sections are not broken down in the same manner as
the first test was. The expectation is that the students should be able to take these
steps and determine what the goal is, what setup needs to happen, the steps and the
results without those being explicitly stated or organized as such in each section.

23

Test #2 ÔÇô General Purpose Input and Output
For this test, you need to use a lights and switches board to provide inputs to
your ATmega328 and to monitor the output from the ATmega328. The one you
created in ECET 17900 should be sufficient, but you could also use the one
youÔÇÖre building in ECET 27000 if you have it finished.
Start simple. Create a basic program that will configure Port B as an output and
then output a known value like 0x55. Connect Port B to the LEDs on your lights
and switches board. As long as everything is working properly, every other output
will be on/off. This will identify ÔÇťbrokenÔÇŁ port pins such as pins that are shorted
together or open connections. Note: You only have 6-bits, but you can still use
this value, you just wonÔÇÖt see the 2-bits.
Then, modify the program to output a value of 0xAA. Similar goal, just swapping
the highs and the lows.
Once you have tested those values, change the value to 0x32. This value should
allow you to clearly identify the upper and lower nibbles to make sure all the pins
are in the correct order.
Using the above steps, we can create a very specific formal plan to test the Port
B as an output.
Once we have the above plan written, we can modify it to test Port C as an
output. It is very simple to create this second test. Literally, just copy and paste
the previous test and change from Port B to Port C. As a note: Port C (because
of the ADC) may be powered by the AVCC pin instead of VCC. If you do not get
the expected results, make certain you are providing 5-volts to the AVCC pin and
try again.
Now that you have a test plan for Port B and Port C, copy and paste the plan to
create a third test plan for testing Port D using the same process. Note: Port D is
a ÔÇťfullÔÇŁ 8-bit port instead of 6-bits like Port B and Port C.
Be certain to print each of these test plans, fill them out, and put them in your
logbook!
Once you have tested each of the ports as an output, the next step is to prove
that you can read data into your microcontroller through the ports. For this test,
you need to create a program that configures one port as an input and then
configures one of the other ports as an output since we donÔÇÖt have a standard
serial port (we could use printf if we had a serial connection). Once the ports are
configured, then you simply read the inputs and write them to the output with a
24

simple statement like: PORTB = PINC; Connect the switches and pushbuttons
from the lights and switches board to Port C to provide inputs to the test program,
and then connect the output of Port B to the LEDs on the lights and switches
board. Once you have this program compiled and downloaded into your
microcontroller, all you need to do is manipulate the pushbutton and switches to
provide predetermined patterns that then should show up on the output LEDs.
Again, the values of 0x55 and 0xAA are create starting points, along with the
value 0x32. You can also use other patterns, but if you do, be certain to include
them as steps in your test plan.
Now that we have a test plan for reading from Port C, we need to also test the
ability of our microcontrollers to read from Port B. As in the previous section,
simply copy and paste the test plan and then change the input from Port C to
Port B, and change the output for the plan from Port B to Port C. Then, utilize this
plan to test this version of the code. Be certain to document each version of the
test plan and record the corresponding results in your logbook.
Once you have completed the testing of Port B and Port C, modify the test plan
to read values from Port D and display them on Port B. Note: Port D is a full 8bits and Port B is only 6-bits, so two bits will not be visible, but you can still verify
the operation of the ports.
Test #3 ÔÇô UART Serial Communication
The goal of this test is to ensure that you can send and receive data through the
serial UART inside your ATmega328. You can take one of two approaches with
this test. You can either display data on the LCD to prove you can send data, OR
you can get creative and use the USB Bridge chip that is on another
microcontroller development board (my preference).
Start by creating a simple program that uses a printf to send a message like
ÔÇťHello WorldÔÇŁ. To create this program, you will need to include a local copy of
serial.c. However, for this project, it isnÔÇÖt as simple as just copying this file and
pasting it in your working directory. The target ATmega328 should be running at
1MHz instead of 16MHz like your Mega2560. Therefore, you will need to change
the values inside the init_UART() function to reflect the frequency change. You
can reference the UART Baud Rate equations from 17900 lecture, OR you can
Google how to configure the UART or you can look them up in the datasheet!
What you should find is that you cannot create 9600 baud using the ÔÇťnormalÔÇŁ
settings. In order to create a 9600 baud output, you will have to set the ÔÇťdouble
speedÔÇŁ bit in the UART and calculate new values for UBRRL and UBBRH.
Document these in the setup section of this formal test plan.
25

Create the code required to produce the Hello World program, and download it
into your target.
Read this section carefully! Once you have this program downloaded into your
target, place a jumper wire between the reset line and ground on your ISP board.
This will hold your ISP micro in a state of reset. Then, connect the RX pin on
your target ATmega328 to the RX pin on the ISP board, and then do the same
with the TX pins. This will connect your target microcontroller to the USB Bridge
chip located on the ISP board and will allow you to send serial messages to the
PC through the USB connection on the ISP!
Connect Cool Term or a similar application to the USB connection on your ISP.
Once connected, reset your 328 microcontroller and the Hello World message
should appear on the terminal if things are working properly!
In order to download a new program into your target, you will have to remove the
jumper wires between the TX and RX pins, AND the jumper wire holding the ISP
in a state of reset.
Once you have proven you can send messages to the terminal with your target
ATmega328, modify the test program to utilize a scanf to get a value from the
terminal and then send that value back to the terminal with a printf. This will
verify that you can both send and receive data through the UART.
Be certain to document both of these test plans and put them in your logbook.
Note: Placing a jumper wire between the reset line and ground on your ISP
microcontroller will hold the microcontroller in a state of constant reset. When in
this state, the pins of the target ISP go into a high impedance state and
effectively donÔÇÖt exist. This state allows us to jump the RX and TX pins from the
target 328 to the USB bridge chip without causing contention on the pins!
Test #4 ÔÇô Analog to Digital Conversions
Testing of the analog to digital converter should be straightforward, if you
remember what we did in ECET 17900. In fact, you can utilize the functions and
first ADC program that we created in ECET 17900 direct, without any
modifications.
Start simple. Create a simple test plan and program that will initialize the ADC
and then read a single 8-bit value from input ADC0 and then display that value
on the LEDs (for this program, do NOT continuously read ADC values! Read one
value, display it, and then enter into a while(1) loop that does absolutely nothing.
You will have to reset the microcontroller each time you want a new value
26

displayed). Since youÔÇÖll need eight LEDs to display the 8-bit value, utilize Port D
for this. Ensure that the UART code from the previous step is NOT in this code!
The UART uses Port D bits 1 and 0 for serial communication. If the UART is
active, you cannot use these bits for general purpose I/O (GPIO). Utilize a
potentiometer to provide the analog input voltage. Connect one end of the
potentiometer to 5-volts, connect the other end to ground, and then connect the
middle pin (the wiper) to the microcontroller to create an adjustable voltage. Test
the program with the wiper set at 0 volts, 2.5 volts, and 5 volts at a minimum.
You could also add a couple intermediate values like 1.25 and 3.75, but you donÔÇÖt
need a ÔÇťbunchÔÇŁ of test points. Three to five test points should be enough for this
program.
Once you have the above program working, change the program so that you are
continuously reading values from the ADC and displaying them on the LEDs
(move the read and write code inside the while(1) loop). With this program, the
LEDs should instantaneous change as you adjust the potentiometer. This proves
that you can make continuous ADC reads and get the correct results.
Once you have the basic 8-bit conversions working, the next step is to create a
program that will read each individual channel of the ADC (channel 0 through 5)
and display those results. This is where the serial port connection through the
ISP board becomes very handy! A printf statement will allow you to display all six
values next to each other, at once. Ideally, you would utilize six potentiometers
to provide analog values to all the ADC inputs at once, but this may not be
practically possible. You should have at least three potentiometers from ECET
17900. If you only have three potentiometers, you could ground the unused ADC
inputs while you test the other three, and then move the potentiometers down to
the next three inputs while grounding the previous three. As an alternative, you
could borrow one of your classmateÔÇÖs potentiometer setups that would then give
you a total of six potentiometers. You could also acquire three more
potentiometers, or you may already have them from another course. Regardless
of the details, you need to test all six of the ADC inputs and prove that you can
read them individually when they are all connected to an analog voltage.
*Optional Testing: You should also test 10-bit conversions with your
microcontroller. For this test, the same approach described earlier (multiple
potentiometers with a printf) would be used, but with 10-bit results instead of 8-bit
results. It would be good to test one single 10-bit conversion first, and then a
second program that continuously converts 10-bit values from all of the channels
individually and then displays those results.

27

Test #5 ÔÇô Pulse Width Modulated Outputs
The last thing to test for this project is to prove that your target microcontroller is
capable of producing pulse-width modulated outputs. Here, weÔÇÖre only going to
focus on the Timer 0 and Timer 1 pulse-width outputs (Timer 2 is also capable of
creating PWM but we donÔÇÖt usually use that timer for PWM so weÔÇÖre not going to
bother with it here).
For the first program and test plan, create a simple program that creates a 50%
duty cycle output waveform on pin OC0A. Make certain you calculate the
expected frequency based on a 1MHz clock, not a 16 MHz clock! Again, we did
this exact thing in a homework assignment in ECET 17900. If it isnÔÇÖt obvious,
you will need to utilize an oscilloscope to display and monitor the outputs for the
tests in this section.
Once you have the previous program working, the next test and program is to
add the second channel from Timer 0 though the OC0B output. Again, output a
fixed duty cycle, but this time, use something like a 25% or 75% duty cycle so
that there is distinct difference between OC0A and the OC0B outputs.
Once you have that done, the next program (and test) should make the output
duty cycles variable. The easiest way to do this is to include the ADC functions
from the previous section and read an 8-bit from ADC0 and another 8-bit value
from ADC1. Utilize the 8-bit value ADC0 to control the pulse width of the OC0A
output and utilize the ADC1 value to control the pulse width of OC0B. For this
test, you should be continuously reading the ADC values and updating the OCR
registers. *You should have created a program that does this in ECET 17900.
Now that you can control the pulse width modulated signals using Timer 0, you
need to move to Timer 1. Start with the same programs and modify them to
utilize Timer 1 instead of Timer 0 (make sure you copy and paste the
programs! DonÔÇÖt overwrite your previous code and be certain to setup the
required port pins for output). As discussed early in this section, start with the
single channel output program, and then move to the others. DonÔÇÖt cut corners
and jump to the last program. Do your testing systematically! In the end, youÔÇÖll
have the same number of test programs and results for Timer 0 as you have for
Timer 1.
Once you have tested Timer 1 in 8-bit mode, then next (and last) test should
utilize Timer 1 to create 16-bit PWM outputs. For this test, go back to ECET
17900 and utilize the programs for PWM Mode 14.

28

For the 16-bit testing, you should create two sets of programs and test. The first
is similar to what we did for the Timer 0. Create a simple PWM test program that
will output a known frequency and duty cycle (or pulse) for both the A and B
outputs of Timer 1 using Fast PWM Mode 14. Make certain that the pulse widths
are different between the two channels.
Once you have the previous test code working, create a new test that utilizes the
ADC to read potentiometer values into your program. Then, utilize these values
to control the pulse widths. For this test, you might be better off to utilize the 10bit versions of the ADC functions since the pulse is 16-bits. If you only utilized
the 8-bit conversions, you can only control a small portion of the overall pulse
width value. Even with the 10-bit conversions, youÔÇÖll only be able to control a
small portion. Regardless of which one you use, consider multiplying the ADC
conversion result by a ÔÇťscaling factorÔÇŁ to utilize the full range. If you multiplied
the result of a 10-bit conversion by 64, then you would ultimately have a value
that goes from 0 to almost 65536 that would allow you to adjust the output pulse
across the entire cycle. If you multiply an 8-bit result by 256, you will also create
values that go from 0 to 65536.

Logbook Requirements:
´éĚ You should have enough detailed information in your logbook that you can
recreate the process of creating an ISP using only the information in your
logbook!
´éĚ You also need to create the required test plans (Excel sheets) using the
information provided here. Once you have created these test plans, you
need to print them out, and then fill them out as you test your simplified
microcontroller board.

29

30

